---
layout: default
title: Aubrie Lee - How to make a website with Eleventy and NearlyFreeSpeech
permalink: /eleventy
---

# How to make a website with Eleventy and NearlyFreeSpeech

2025.06.14
{: .centeredText .noIndent}

<br>

I'm mostly writing this to remind myself. I honestly don't much care for NearlyFreeSpeech, as I find its copy and documentation to be terribly unclear. I can't promise this little article of mine will be much clearer.

Eleventy is a static site generator that helps one make webpages, which one can then upload to a hosting platform like NearlyFreeSpeech via a file transfer software. This article covers:
1. Making a basic webpage with Eleventy.
1. Setting up NearlyFreeSpeech hosting with a custom third-party domain.
1. Uploading your site.


## 1. make a webpage with eleventy

You'll set up a basic page you can visit locally on your computer. Later, you'll upload it to the internet.

### set up eleventy

To simplify [Eleventy's documentation](https://www.11ty.dev/) in a way that makes sense to me:
{: .noIndent }

* Open a terminal window on your computer.
* Enter `node --version` to check whether you have Node.js version 18 or newer installed.
* If you don't, follow [nodejs.org's documentation to download it](https://nodejs.org/en/download/). That site has a "Copy to clipboard" button, but you'll need to enter each non-comment line into your terminal one at a time.
* Make a folder on your computer called whatever you'd like (but use special characters at your own risk), e.g., **eleventy-project**.
* Change directory in your terminal to the **eleventy-project** folder. I do this by typing `cd` and then dragging the folder into the terminal window. Then hit enter. For example:
<pre>
cd /Users/Documents/eleventy-project
</pre>
* Enter into terminal: 
<pre>
npx @11ty/eleventy --serve
</pre>
Eleventy should start running continuously.

### make a rudimentary webpage

In the **eleventy-project** folder, make a plain-text Markdown file called **index.md**. I rather loathe Markdown, yet here I am using it.

Here's a basic page you can put in that file:

<pre>
# Hello, world.

Abolish portrait mode.
</pre>

Eleventy makes (? maybe you have to make it yourself) a subfolder called **_site**, in which it creates the main index.html and other files that you'll later upload to NearlyFreeSpeech.

While it's running, Eleventy hosts the **index.html** file at `http://localhost:8080/`. Enter that into your browser's address bar, and the browser should display your site.

When you update and save your **index.md** file, your site at `http://localhost:8080/` should update, too.

## 2. set up domain and hosting

You'll set up the place that'll hold your site online.
{: .noIndent }

* Rent a domain at some registrar. I try not to rent any domain for more than $12 a year. I used a third-party registrar, not NearlyFreeSpeech.
* Make a NearlyFreeSpeech.Net (NFSN) account. You don't need the paid membership to use hosting.
* Add money to the account, on the order of $20.
* Make a new site. Name the site the same as your second-level domain. For example, if you rented **something.com**, name your NFSN site **something**. You do not need DNS from NFSN.

### connect your third-party domain to NFSN

No amount of internet searching gave me an easy answer to this, and NFSN's documentation sure didn't help, so I figured it out myself by trial and retrial.
* In NFSN, go to **sites**, then click on the short name of your site (e.g., **something**).
* On the page called **something Site Information**, find **Web Site IP Addresses**. Note those two numbers (e.g., ###.##.###.## and ####:####:##:#::####).
* Go to the DNS settings of your site in your third-party domain registrar.
* Erase any A, AAAA, and CNAME records.
* Set up an A record with Host being **something.com** and Answer being the first IP address (e.g., ###.##.###.##).
* Set up an AAAA record with Host being **something.com** and Answer being the second IP address (e.g., ####:####:##:#::####).
* Set up a CNAME record with Host being **www.something.com** and answer being **something.nfshost.com**.

<br>

It'll take a while for HTTPS rather than HTTP to be enabled (not sure who enables it). When it is enabled, a ðŸ” emoji will appear next to all three **Site Names & Aliases** at the top of the site information page on NFSN.

## 3. upload your website using FTP

* Take note of the **SSH/SFTP Information** section of your NFSN site information page.
* Get a file transfer protocol (FTP) app. I won't say which I use, because it isn't accessible to screen readers.
* Connect to your NFSN site using the FTP app. For Host, use the **SSH/SFTP Hostname** from your NFSN site information page. For Username and Password, use the **Username** and **Password** from that page. For Port, use **22**.
* Once you're connected, your FTP app should show you a directory of files locally and files on NFSN.
* Under the **public** folder of your NFSN site, upload the contents of your **eleventy-project** > **_site** subfolder. Don't upload the **_site** folder itself. At this point, you probably have only an index.html file.

<br>

To update files after editing them locally, just upload them to NFSN and overwrite their past versions.
